AUTH48 (#199)
sframe-wg/sframe: draft-ietf-sframe-enc.md

    organization: CoSMo Software
    email: sergio.garcia.murillo@cosmosoftware.io
 -

>     ins: R. Barnes

Reviewer: I generally avoid "ins", unless xml2rfc is going to do the wrong thing with "name".  It won't in this case.

```suggestion
```

3. Minimize packet expansion to allow successful conferencing in as many
   network conditions as possible.

4. Decouple the media encryption framework from the underlying transport,

>    allowing use in non-RTP, e.g., WebTransport

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   allowing use in non-RTP transports, e.g., WebTransport
```

  size of a "tag" that is added to the plaintext)

> * `AEAD.Nka` - For cipher suites using the compound AEAD described in

Reviewer 2: I originally read `Nka` as "size-of-key-for-AEAD", which made sense to me, but then I realized that since we're always using AEAD, it's really "size-of-key-for-compound-AEAD".  Maybe `Nkc`?

> * `AEAD.Nka` - For cipher suites using the compound AEAD described in

Reviewer 3: `Nke` looks good to me.

### Decryption

Before decrypting, a receiver needs to assemble a full SFrame ciphertext. When
an SFrame ciphertext is fragmented into multiple parts for transport (e.g.,
a whole encrypted frame sent in multiple SRTP packets), the receiving client
collects all the fragments of the ciphertext, using appropriate sequencing
and start/end markers in the transport. Once all of the required fragments are

> available, the client reassembles them into the SFrame ciphertext, then it passes

Reviewer 4: Yes, this edit works also.

## Sender Keys

> If the participants in a call have a preexisting E2E-secure channel, they can

Author: Well OK, if Chicago and M-W say so...

`sframe_salt` that it uses to encrypt with.  Senders may choose any KID value
within their assigned set of KID values, e.g., to allow a single sender to send
multiple, uncoordinated outbound media streams.

~~~ pseudocode
base_key = MLS-Exporter("SFrame 1.0 Base Key", "", AEAD.Nk)
~~~

<!-- [rfced] Section 5.2. We are having difficulty parsing the following. Does the Receiver remove the old epoch? Should "the same E lower bits" be "the same low-order E bits"?

Original:
   Receivers MUST
   be prepared for the epoch counter to roll over, removing an old epoch
   when a new epoch with the same E lower bits is introduced.

Perhaps:
   Receivers MUST
   be prepared for the epoch counter to roll over and remove an old epoch
   when a new epoch with the same low-order E bits is introduced. -->

For compactness, we do not send the whole epoch number.  Instead, we send only
its low-order `E` bits, where `E` is a value set by the application.  `E`
effectively defines a reordering window, since no more than 2<sup>`E`</sup>
epochs can be active at a given time.  Receivers MUST be prepared for the epoch
counter to roll over, removing an old epoch when a new epoch with the same E

> lower bits is introduced.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps "To handle the rollover of the epoch counter..."

encapsulate each layer in a different SFrame ciphertext.

## Video Key Frames

Forward security and post-compromise security require that the E2EE keys (base keys)
are updated any time a participant joins or leaves the call.

The key exchange happens asynchronously and on a different path than the SFU signaling
and media. So it may happen that when a new participant joins the call and the
SFU side requests a key frame, the sender generates the E2EE frame
with a key that is not known by the receiver, so it will be discarded. When the sender
updates his sending key with the new key, it will send it in a non-key frame, so
the receiver will be able to decrypt it, but not decode it.

The new receiver will then re-request a key frame, but due to sender and SFU
policies, that new key frame could take some time to be generated.

If the sender sends a key frame after the new E2EE key is in use, the time
required for the new participant to display the video is minimized.

Note that this issue does not arise for media streams that do not have
dependencies among frames, e.g., audio streams.  In these streams, each frame is

> independently decodable, so there is never a need to process together two frames

Reviewer 2: FWIW, I preferred the previous text, or perhaps "process two frames together that are on either side of a key rotation".

Author: Thanks, that's a better rewording.

### Simulcast

When using simulcast, the same input image will produce N different encoded
frames (one per simulcast layer), which would be processed independently by the
frame encryptor and assigned an unique counter for each.

> ### SVC

Author: ```suggestion
### Scalable Video Coding (SVC)
```

Perhaps:
   IANA has created a new registry called "SFrame Cipher Suites" (Section 8.1)
   under the "SFrame" group registry heading.  Assignments are made per the following
   registration procedures [RFC8126]:

   0-0xEFFF  Specification Required
   0-0xEFFF  Standards Action
   0xF000-0xFFFF  Private Use
-->

## SFrame Cipher Suites

The "SFrame Cipher Suites" registry lists identifiers for SFrame cipher suites as defined in
{{cipher-suites}}.  The cipher suite field is two bytes wide, so the valid cipher
suites are in the range 0x0000 to 0xFFFF.

The registration template is as follows:

* Value: The numeric value of the cipher suite

* Name: The name of the cipher suite

* Recommended: Whether support for this cipher suite is recommended by the IETF.
  Valid values are "Y", "N", and "D" as described in {{Section 17.1 of
  MLS-PROTO}}. The default value of the "Recommended" column is "N". Setting the
  Recommended item to "Y" or "D", or changing an item whose current value is "Y"
  or "D", requires Standards Action {{RFC8126}}.

* Reference: The document where this cipher suite is defined

* Change Controller: Who is authorized to update the row in the registry

> 
> <!--[rfced] IANA Considerations. FYI, we have added "Change Controller" to the registry template and table as IANA has added this column to the "SFrame Cipher Suites" registry. Please review. -->
> 

Author: Thanks, yes, we agreed to this with IANA on that thread.

```suggestion
```

Initial contents:

| Value           | Name                          | R | Reference | Change Controller |
|:----------------|:------------------------------|:--|:----------|:------------------|
| 0x0000          | Reserved                      | - | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0x0001          | `AES_128_CTR_HMAC_SHA256_80`  | Y | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0x0002          | `AES_128_CTR_HMAC_SHA256_64`  | Y | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0x0003          | `AES_128_CTR_HMAC_SHA256_32`  | Y | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0x0004          | `AES_128_GCM_SHA256_128`      | Y | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0x0005          | `AES_256_GCM_SHA512_128`      | Y | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
| 0xF000 - 0xFFFF | Reserved for Private Use      | - | RFC 9605  | IETF              |
{: #iana-cipher-suites title="SFrame Cipher Suites" }

# Application Responsibilities

To use SFrame, an application needs to define the inputs to the SFrame
encryption and decryption operations, and how SFrame ciphertexts are delivered
from sender to receiver (including any fragmentation and reassembly).  In this

> section, we lay out additional requirements that an implementation must meet in

Author: ```suggestion
section, we lay out additional requirements that an application must meet in
```

with the same key and nonce.

It is not mandatory to implement anti-replay on the receiver side. Receivers MAY
apply time- or counter-based anti-replay mitigations.  For example, {{Section
3.3.2 of ?RFC3711}} specifies a counter-based anti-replay mitigation, which
could be adapted to use with SFrame, using the CTR field as the counter.

## Metadata

> The `metadata` input to SFrame operations an opaque byte string specified by the application. As

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `metadata` input to SFrame operations is an opaque byte string specified by the application. As
```

with the same key and nonce.

It is not mandatory to implement anti-replay on the receiver side. Receivers MAY
apply time- or counter-based anti-replay mitigations.  For example, {{Section
3.3.2 of ?RFC3711}} specifies a counter-based anti-replay mitigation, which
could be adapted to use with SFrame, using the CTR field as the counter.

## Metadata

> <!--[rfced] Section 9.4. It is unclear what "pure" means in the following sentence. Is the metadata only specified by the application? Please help us clarify.
> 
> Original:
>    The metadata input to SFrame operations is pure application-specified
>    data. -->
> 

Author: Yes, it is whatever the application provides, not modified or processed by the SFrame logic except to feed it into the AAD.  Proposed rewording.

```suggestion
```

> The `metadata` input to SFrame operations is pure application-specified data. As

Author: ```suggestion
The `metadata` input to SFrame operations comprises arbitrary data specified by the application. As
```

and packets, so the overhead is the same whether one uses SFrame at a per-packet
or per-frame level.

{{audio-overhead}} considers three scenarios that are based on recommended configurations
of the Opus codec {{?RFC6716}}:

> * Narrow-band (NB) speech: 120 ms packets (8 frames per second (fps)), 8 kbps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Narrow-band (NB) speech: 120 ms packets (8.3 frames per second (fps)), 8 kbps
```

? Why repeat this when it is in the table?

Author: Yeah, just to do the fps expansion outside the table.  I have reworked this table to remove the bullets entirely and put the "fps" expansion in the intro text.

For example, consider an application where SFrame is used to encrypt audio
frames that are sent over SRTP, with some application data included in the RTP
header extension. Suppose the application also includes this application data in
the SFrame metadata, so that the SFU is allowed to read, but not modify, the
application data.  A receiver can use the application data in the RTP header
extension as part of the standard SRTP decryption process since this is
required to recover the SFrame ciphertext carried in the SRTP payload.  However,
the receiver MUST NOT use the application data for other purposes before SFrame
decryption has authenticated the application data.

--- back
<!--Informative References:
[I-D.codec-agnostic-rtp-payload-format] replaced by draft-gouaillard-avtcore-codec-agn-rtp-payload, which is expired.
[I-D.ietf-moq-transport] Active WG document
[I-D.ietf-webtrans-overview] Active WG document

> [MLS-ARCH] Active WG document -->

Author: TODO(RLB): Remove this comment.

The primary operations on an SFrame context are as follows:

* **Create an SFrame context:** The context is initialized with a cipher suite and
  no KID mappings.

> * **Add a key for sending:** The key and salt are derived from the base key, and
>   are used to initialize a send context, together with a zero counter value.
> * **Add a key for receiving:** The key and salt are derived from the base key, and
>   are used to initialize a send context.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Add a key for sending:** The key and salt are derived from the base key and
  used to initialize a send context, together with a zero counter value.
* **Add a key for receiving:** The key and salt are derived from the base key and
  used to initialize a send context.
```

overhead; and `CTPerSecond` reflects the number of SFrame ciphertexts
sent per second (e.g., packets or frames per second).

In the remainder of this section, we compute overhead estimates for a collection
of common scenarios.

## Assumptions

In the below calculations, we make conservative assumptions about SFrame
overhead so that the overhead amounts we compute here are likely to be an upper
bound of those seen in practice.

> 
> <!--[rfced] Section B.1. FYI, we added a title to Table 3.
> 
> Current:
>   Table 3:  Overhead Analysis Assumptions
> -->

Author: 👍 

```suggestion
```

| Field           | Bytes | Explanation                                       |
|:----------------|------:|:--------------------------------------------------|
| Fixed header    | 1     | Fixed                                             |
| Key ID (KID)    | 2     | >255 senders; or MLS epoch (E=4) and >16 senders  |
| Counter (CTR)   | 3     | More than 24 hours of media in common cases       |

> | Cipher overhead | 16    | Full Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) tag (longest defined here)  |

Author: ```suggestion
| Cipher overhead | 16    | Full authentication tag (longest defined here)  |
```

and packets, so the overhead is the same whether one uses SFrame at a per-packet
or per-frame level.

{{audio-overhead}} considers three scenarios that are based on recommended configurations
of the Opus codec {{?RFC6716}}:

* Narrow-band (NB) speech: 120 ms packets, 8 kbps
* Full-band (FB) speech: 20 ms packets, 32 kbps
* Full-band stereo music: 10 ms packets, 128 kbps

| Scenario                  | Frames per Second (fps) | Base kbps | Overhead kbps | Overhead % |
|:--------------------------|:---:|:---------:|:-------------:|:----------:|
| NB speech, 120 ms packets | 8.3 |         8 |           1.4 |      17.9% |
| FB speech, 20 ms packets  |  50 |        32 |           8.6 |      26.9% |
| FB stereo, 10 ms packets  | 100 |       128 |          17.2 |      13.4% |

> {: #audio-overhead title="SFrame Overhead for Audio Streams" }

Author: TODO(RLB): Add "fps" terminology above, revert expansion, and realign column dividers.

## Video

Video frames can be larger than an MTU and thus are commonly split across
multiple frames.  {{video-overhead-per-frame}} and {{video-overhead-per-packet}}
show the estimated overhead of encrypting a video stream, where SFrame is
applied per frame and per packet, respectively.  The choices of resolution,
frames per second, and bandwidth roughly reflect the capabilities of

> modern video codecs across a range from very-low to very-high quality.

Author: ```suggestion
modern video codecs across a range from very low to very high quality.
```

{: #video-overhead-per-frame title="SFrame Overhead for a Video Stream Encrypted per Frame" }

| Scenario    | fps | Packets per Second (pps) | Base kbps | Overhead kbps | Overhead % |
|:------------|:---:|:---:|:---------:|:-------------:|:----------:|
| 426 x 240   | 7.5 | 7.5 |        45 |           1.3 |       2.9% |
| 640 x 360   |  15 |  30 |       200 |           5.2 |       2.6% |
| 640 x 360   |  30 |  60 |       400 |          10.3 |       2.6% |
| 1280 x 720  |  30 | 180 |      1500 |          30.9 |       2.1% |
| 1920 x 1080 |  60 | 780 |      7200 |         134.1 |       1.9% |
{: #video-overhead-per-packet title="SFrame Overhead for a Video Stream Encrypted per Packet" }

In the per-frame case, the SFrame percentage overhead approaches zero as the
quality of the video improves since bandwidth is driven more by picture size
than frame rate.  In the per-packet case, the SFrame percentage overhead
approaches the ratio between the SFrame overhead per packet and the MTU (here 22
bytes of SFrame overhead divided by an assumed 1200-byte MTU, or about 1.8%).

## Conferences

Real conferences usually involve several audio and video streams.  The overhead

> of SFrame in such a conference is the aggregate of the overhead of all the

Author: ```suggestion
of SFrame in such a conference is the aggregate of the overhead across all the
```

that would need to be overcome.

As discussed in {{application-context}}, there are two natural patterns for
integrating SFrame into an application: applying SFrame per frame or per packet.
In RTP-based applications, applying SFrame per packet means that the payload of
each RTP packet will be an SFrame ciphertext, starting with an SFrame header, as
shown in {{sframe-packet}}.  Applying SFrame per frame means that different

> RTP payloads will have different formats: the first payload of a frame will

Author: ```suggestion
RTP payloads will have different formats: The first payload of a frame will
```

that use SDP for negotiating RTP media streams {{?RFC8866}}, an appropriate
extension to SDP could provide this function.

> <!--[rfced] Section B.5. draft-codec-agnostic-rtp-payload-format has been replaced by draft-gouaillard-avtcore-codec-agn-rtp-payload (which expired Sept 2021). Do you want to replace the reference?
> 
> Original:
>    In order for such a generic packetization scheme to work
>    interoperably one would have to be defined, e.g., as proposed in
>    [I-D.codec-agnostic-rtp-payload-format].
> -->
> 

Author: Yep.

```suggestion
```

Applying SFrame per frame also requires that packetization and depacketization
be done in a generic manner that does not depend on the media content of the

> packets, since the content being packetized/depacketized will be opaque

Author: ```suggestion
packets, since the content being packetized or depacketized will be opaque
```

ciphertext (except for the SFrame header).  In order for such a generic
packetization scheme to work interoperably, one would have to be defined, e.g.,

> as proposed in {{?I-D.codec-agnostic-rtp-payload-format}}.

Author: ```suggestion
as proposed in {{?I-D.gouaillard-avtcore-codec-agn-rtp-payload}}.
```

facilitate debugging of test failures.

{::include test-vectors/sframe.md}

# Acknowledgements
{: numbered="false"}

The authors wish to specially thank {{{Dr. Alex Gouaillard}}} as one of the early
contributors to the document. His passion and energy were key to the design and
development of SFrame.

<!--[rfced] Terminology.

a) FYI, we have added expansions for abbreviations upon first use per Section 3.6 of RFC 7322 ("RFC Style Guide"). Please review each expansion in the document carefully to ensure correctness.

b) Please help us expand or define the following term:

   SVC

c) May we make the use of the acronym KID consistent?

>    Key ID (13) / KID (85)

Author: Generally, Key ID should be used throughout the section defining the header format, and KID elsewhere.  I have tried to implement this change.

d) Please help us make the capitalization of the following terms consistent

   counter (22) / Counter (9) - We note that Key ID is capitalized.

>                                 Should CTR be used instead?

Author: When referring to the SFrame field, "Counter" should be used in the section defining the header format, and "CTR" elsewhere.  There are also several generic uses of "counter", which should be left as "counter".

facilitate debugging of test failures.

{::include test-vectors/sframe.md}

# Acknowledgements
{: numbered="false"}

The authors wish to specially thank {{{Dr. Alex Gouaillard}}} as one of the early
contributors to the document. His passion and energy were key to the design and
development of SFrame.

> <!--[rfced] Terminology.

Author: TODO(RLB): Remove this comment.

a) FYI, we have added expansions for abbreviations upon first use per Section 3.6 of RFC 7322 ("RFC Style Guide"). Please review each expansion in the document carefully to ensure correctness.

b) Please help us expand or define the following term:

>    SVC

Author: "Scalable Video Coding".  I fixed this above.

c) May we make the use of the acronym KID consistent?

   Key ID (13) / KID (85)

d) Please help us make the capitalization of the following terms consistent

   counter (22) / Counter (9) - We note that Key ID is capitalized.
                                Should CTR be used instead?

e) Please review the use of fixed-width format for the following terms and let us know if any updates are necessary:

   context, when referring to a value
   CTR
   key, when referring to input
   KID

>    nonce

Author: TODO(RLB): Review these for consistency.

Author: * CTR and KID should never be fixed-width.  It does not appear they ever are, outside of pseudocode.
* "context" should only be fixed width in the context of the MLS section, where it refers to a specific value.
* "key" and "nonce" look to be correctly only fixed-width in the context of the test vectors.

f) As "up to" may be difficult for ESL readers to understand, may we update the use of the phrase "it is up to the application" to "it is the application's responsibility"?

> 

Author: TODO(RLB): Implement this suggestion.
